---
title: STC model
about: |
    This is the current Space Time Coordinates model proposal
layout: page
flavor: current
---

Table of Contents
-----------------
* TOC
{:toc}

Generalities
------------

As for the other examples we provide two representations for the instances. One is expressed in
a Domain Specific Language (DSL) that we are developing along with the VODML-related standards.

The DSL is independent of the serialization format, and allows to describe the instances
in a simpler language without much boilerplate.

We also provide the VOTable serializations of those instances, which is what providers and
clients will need to work with in practice.

Coordinate Frames
-----------------

A coordinate frame defines:
  * its origin in terms of another reference frame, possibly a standard one
  * its orientation or direction
  * the coordinate axes it is composed of.

Note that a library of common/standard reference frames can be built in a single VOTable. Intances in other files can
refer to such frames when declaring their positions. The following example represents such a library of frames.

### DSL Instance

{% include jovial.md name='standard-frames' %}

### VOTable serialization

{% include votable.md name='standard-frames' %}

Positions
---------

Positions can be expressed in terms of the coordinate axes defined as part of the coordinate frames, even remotely
as shown in the examples below, where positions refer to axes defined in the `standard-frames.vot.xml` file.

Below are two examples of the same 2D position in the sky in two different reference frames.

### ICRS position, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='position-icrs' %}

### ICRS position, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='position-icrs' %}

### FK4 B1950 position, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='position-fk4' %}

### FK4 B1950 position, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='position-icrs' %}

### ICRS Position with Ellipse Error, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='position-icrs-ellipse' %}

### ICRS position with Ellipse Error, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='position-icrs-ellipse' %}


Time measurements
-----------------

### TT ISO Time, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='tt-iso-time' %}

### TT ISO Time, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='tt-iso-time' %}

### TT JD Time, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='tt-jd-time' %}

### TT JD Time, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='tt-jd-time' %}

### TT MJD Time, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='tt-mjd-time' %}

### TT MJD Time, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='tt-mjd-time' %}

Custom Frames
-------------

The following example shows how to define a custom time frame in terms of standard ones.

### TT MET Time, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='tt-met-time' %}

### TT MET Time, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='tt-met-time' %}

Other Measurements
------------------

### Magnitude with Symmetric Error, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='magnitude-sym-error' %}

### Magnitude with Symmetric Error, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='magnitude-sym-error' %}

### Magnitude with Asymmetric Error, DSL

{% include jovial.md name='magnitude-asym-error' %}

### Magnitude with Asymmetric Error, VOTable

{% include votable.md name='magnitude-asym-error' %}

Notes
-----

At this point these are just my (olaurino) notes coming from implementing examples and thinking about applications.

### Quantities

Some quantities are defined as `ivoa:Quantity` rather than a specific subtype. Was this intended?

### Time type casting

Data producers need to explicitly cast the time-related types when serializing a time measurement. For instance,
here is what you need to serialize an `ISOTime` (in DSL):

``` groovy 

    instance(type: "stc2_measurements:CoordinateMDomains.timeMDomain.TimeMeasure") {
        instance (role: "coord") {
            instance(role: "cmpt", type: "stc2_coordinates:CoordinateDomains.timeDomain.ISOtime") {
                instance role: "cval", value: "2000-09-02T01:10:14"
                reference(role: "coordAxis") {
                    // This is not very portable or convenient. There should be a URI
                    remote "file://./standard-frames.vot#TT_AXIS"
                }
            }
        }
    }

```

versus JD:

``` groovy

    instance(type: "stc2_measurements:CoordinateMDomains.timeMDomain.TimeMeasure") {
        instance (role: "coord") {
            instance(role: "cmpt", type: "stc2_coordinates:CoordinateDomains.timeDomain.TimeOffset") {
                instance role: "cval", value: "2450814.52", unit: "d"
                reference(role: "coordAxis") {
                    // This is not very portable or convenient. There should be a URI
                    remote "file://./standard-frames.vot#JD_TT_AXIS"
                }
            }
        }
    }

```

Note that we need to explicitly cast the coordinate component to its actual type, i.e.
`CoordinateDomains.timeDomain.ISOtime` or `CoordinateDomains.timeDomain.TimeOffset`.

I am not even sure my instances are correct, because the model has special `JD` and `MJD` types,
so I should probably be using them.

So this is the first comment: the taxonomy might be too complex here for data producers and consumers to use.

How is this an advantage over a single `datetime` primitive object?

The one I can see is that some times are expressed as strings while others as numbers.

So one might have two types for times that are espressed as strings and times that are expressed as numbers.

It's very possible that I am missing something, though.

### Coordinate frames, positions, and axes.

Coordinate frames have a composition relationship with physical coordinate axes. However, as shown in the examples
for icrs and fk4-b1950 it's clear that the axes are the same and it might make sense to reuse them.

On the other hand, when you create a position, as in the examples, the position components don't refer to the frame but
to the axis, so the instances of the axes must be different.

So maybe this is fine: each individual frame defines its own instances of axes. There is some redundancy, but
this way coordinates may refer to the axis rather than to the frame. On the other hand, it seems strange that positions
do not refer to the frame if not through the constraint that axis instances can only belong to one parent frame.

A different approach might be to make the position refer to the frame and the individual components refer to the axes,
removing all references from the frame to the axes. This way one could decouple the orientation and reference position
of the reference frame from the definition of the axes. A position would need to reference a frame (position of the
origin and orientation/epoch) and individual coordinate components would refer to the axis along which they are defined.

This would have several advantages:

  * only few axes (min value, max value, units, etc) could be defined and reused.
  * the number of reference frames in a standardized library would also be reduced, because it does not need to include
  all possible/common combinations of orientation, origin, and axes flavors.
  * it would make it easier for people to define custom reference frames: say all I need to change is an epoch, the
  number of types and attributes to implement is greatly reduced.
  * it would make it easier for clients to parse information in the presence of custom reference frames, as the axes
  would still be the same and part of a restricted number of possible instances (discounting extreme cases of
  customized coordinate systems), which would make it possible for the most common clients to make sense and good use
  of the data, even if they are unaware of details like orientation. In other terms, even an application that doesn't
  know anything about astronomical reference frames should be able to represent data in spherical coordinates.
  
It's very possible there might be disadvantages as well, however they would probably be shared with the current
implementation, since all the above refactoring does is to decouple information that is not used when declaring
positions anyway.

### Other (minor) stuff

Some package names break the vodml conventions, e.g. `CoordinateDomains`.

A lot of names are redundant, for instance `stc2_coordinates:CoordinateDomains` might simply be
`stc2_coordinates:domains` and `CoordinateDomains.timeDomain` be reduced to `domains.time`, thus turning
`stc2_coordinates:CoordinateDomains.timeDomain.TimeOffset` to `stc2_coordinates:domains.time.Offset`.

Similarly, one can get rid of the obscure `stc2_measurements:CoordinateMDomains.timeMDomain` (note the extra 'M's)
in favor of `stc2_measurements:domains.time`. 

### VODML Mapping

There is currently no mechanism for referencing an object by ID/URI. Should there be one or is
`REMOTEREFERENCE` enough?