---
title: Cube and Dataset models (w/ Time Series examples)
about: |
    This is the current Data Cube model proposal along with the current DatasetMetadata proposal.
layout: page
model: cube
flavor: current
---

Table of Contents
-----------------
* TOC
{:toc}

Generalities
------------

We provide two representations for the instances. One is expressed in
a Domain Specific Language (DSL) that we are developing along with the VODML-related standards.

The DSL is independent of the serialization format, and allows to describe the instances
in a simpler language without much boilerplate.

We also provide the VOTable serializations of those instances, which is what providers and
clients will need to work with in practice.

Model Files
-----------

{% capture cube-html %}/assets/examples/{{page.model}}/{{page.flavor}}/models/Cube-1.0.html{% endcapture %}
[Cube HTML documentation]({{ cube-html | absolute_url }})
{% capture cube-html %}/assets/examples/{{page.model}}/{{page.flavor}}/models/DatasetMedata-1.0.html{% endcapture %}
[Dataset HTML documentation]({{ cube-html | absolute_url }})

Time Series
-----------

{% include examples.md name='time-series' %}

Vizier Beta Lyrae Time Series
-----------------------------

{% include examples.md name='betalyr-vizier' %}

Complicated Vizier Beta Lyrae Time Series
-----------------------------------------

This example is equivalent to the one above. However, it was created with the constraint that some of the common
information would be stored in tables with only one row. This complicates the serialization a lot. One reason for doing
this might be to annotate legacy VOTables in this weird format. However there are no existing providers serving this
kind of files in production as far as we know.

The odd format is a hybrid between the simple serialization presented in the previous example and more complex, legit
scenarios where some metadata that is usually shared among instances, like coordinate frames, vary for each row in the 
main data table.

Say for example that one has a time series, but each time measurement in each row may be expressed in its own 
time frame. Time frames could still be represented with standalone instances, but now you can't refer to them with a
`REFERENCE/IDREF` element because the ID of the time frame would be serialized in the table's `TD`s. Instead, you'd 
need to use a `REFERENCE/FOREIGNKEY/PKFIELD/COLUMN` element to represent that the column contains the values of the 
reference. This value however needs to be represented as a primary key. If the 
time frames are represented directly through standalone instances, then you can simply use 
`INSTANCE/PRIMARYKEY/PKFIELD/LITERAL` to contain a single, direct, ID value for the specific time frame.

For some reason you might need, however, to represent the time frames in their own table through templates. Say for 
instance that the time frames are too many to serialize directly without bloating the annotation. There are also 
common legit cases where multiple tables are related to each other through the relational model. In this case you 
would need to include a column for the ID of the time frame instances, and declare that column as the primary key for
the table. So you  would use `INSTANCE/PRIMARYKEY/PKFIELD/COLUMN`. This is completely equivalent to the previous 
case with direct, standalone instances of time frames, this time with templates.

The example below, however, is the worst of both worlds. It introduces a lot of the complexity of the Object 
Relational Mapping patterns without a compelling reason for doing so (again, unless it's an annotation of a legacy 
service). It's an hybrid situation where tables are used to represent a single instance. In this case, if one doesn't
want to introduce a new column in the table for the foreign key, the Mapping standard provides a means to factor out 
the primary key and express it as a single `LITERAL`.

We could consider complicating the standard to include the concept of a "one-row-table" so to simplify the 
serialization fo this very ad-hoc case, but that would have several drawbacks:
  * it would complicate the standard by introducing one more mapping pattern to add to the VOTable xml schema, and 
  clients would have to implement it.
  * it would require clients to deal with more pathological cases, e.g. invalid "one-row-tables" with multiple rows.
  * there would be two valid mapping patterns for representing the same thing, possibly with legit cases of 
  multiple-row tables happening to have only one row in some specific responses. Again, clients would have to deal 
  with both.

On the other hand, if a weird format like this had to really be implemented in production, the fact that a template, 
i.e. something that would normally be represented by a table with multiple rows, has a `LITERAL` as the primary key 
field might already signal clients that that is a single-valued instance represented, for some reason, in a table. 
This signal could be expressely noted in the standard as a special case clients might decide to implement, but it 
doesn't require a change to the standard.
  
Note also that this weird format requires unrelated instances (e.g. `_SHENAVRIN` and `_VIZIER`, or the time frame 
and the space frame) to be serialized in the same table. In some sense the table has multiple, independent primary keys
that serve different instances, which is by itself strange, at least in this simple case.

In summary, while this serialization is equivalent to the one presented earlier, it requires all the complexity of ORM 
for describing something that could be much more easily described, using the current syntax, with a sensible 
representation.

ORM patterns are still needed, but for intrinsically complex cases where instances are joined across multiple tabels 
according to the relational model.

A caveat about the example below: this example does not include all the tables included in the [original dataset 
located in volute](http://volute.g-vo.org/svn/trunk/projects/time-domain/time-series/data_sample/BetaLyr_Vizier.xml)
for simplicity. It illustrates all the shortcoming of the format and how the current syntax 
would in any case support this case, e.g. for legacy datasets if any.

{% include examples.md name='betalyr-vizier-one-row-tables' %}
